Add Python script to approximate filtered h-gain waveform (#387)
dwavesystems/dwave-ocean-sdk: docs/quantum_research/annealing.rst

See the :ref:`qpu_annealprotocol_fast` section for further details.

.. _qpu_qa_h_gain:

Varying the Linear-Bias Schedule
================================

For the :ref:`standard annealing <qpu_annealprotocol_standard>` and
:ref:`reverse annealing <qpu_qa_anneal_sched_reverse>` protocols, you can
schedule a time-dependent gain for the Hamiltonian's linear biases (i.e., qubit
biases). The :ref:`parameter_qpu_h_gain_schedule` parameter is applied to qubit
biases :math:`h_i` and specifies the :math:`g(t)` function in the Hamiltonian,

.. math::
    :nowrap:

    \begin{equation}
        {\cal H}_{ising} = - \frac{A({s})}{2}
        \left(\sum_i {\hat\sigma_{x}^{(i)}}\right)
        + \frac{B({s})}{2} \left(g(t) \sum_{i} h_i {\hat\sigma_{z}^{(i)}}
        + \sum_{i>j} J_{i,j} {\hat\sigma_{z}^{(i)}} {\hat\sigma_{z}^{(j)}}\right)
    \end{equation}

where :math:`{\hat\sigma_{x,z}^{(i)}}` are Pauli matrices operating on a qubit
:math:`q_i`; and :math:`h_i` and :math:`J_{i,j}` are the qubit biases and
coupling strengths, respectively. For examples of using this feature, see
[Vod2025]_ and [Pel2023]_.

> .. _qpu_exec_hgain_waveform:

Reviewer: why "exec"?

Author: Execute.

Filter-Cutoff Frequencies
-------------------------

Low-pass filters with cutoff frequencies of 3 MHz for |dwave_5kq| systems and
6.5 MHz for |adv2| systems limit the bandwidth of the ``h``-gain waveform
delivered to the QPU, shown in
:numref:`Figure %s <filtered_hgain_waveform_6.5mhz>` as an approximation.
Thus, if you configure a too-rapidly changing curve, even
within the supported bounds, expect distorted values of ``h`` for your problem. 

.. figure:: ../_images/filtered_hgain_waveform_6.5mhz.png
    :name: filtered_hgain_waveform_6.5mhz
    :alt: Graph showing both a linear-bias gain waveform before the Advantage2
        system's 6.5-MHz low-pass filter is applied and an approximation of the
        waveform after said filter is applied.

    Graph showing both a linear-bias gain waveform before the Advantage2
    system's 6.5-MHz low-pass filter is applied and an approximation of the
    waveform after said filter is applied.

.. _approximate_filtered_h_gain:

.. dropdown:: Approximating the Filtered Waveform

>     You can use the following Python script to approximate the h-gain waveform

Reviewer: "h-gain" can we drop this?

>     that is filtered and executed on the QPU. The script's

Reviewer: " that is filtered and executed on the QPU" --> I think this is clearer without the "filtered and"

    error message with the maximum allowed slope.

.. _approximate_filtered_h_gain:

Approximating the Filtered h-gain Waveform
------------------------------------------

In this sample Python script, the method ``approximate_filtered_h_gain``
derives an approximation of the filtered h-gain waveform by applying a
second-order low-pass Bessel filter to the original waveform.

The ``approximate_filtered_h_gain`` method takes the following
parameters:

*   ``pwl``: Original h-gain waveform to approximate. The format of the PWL
    curve must be expressed as a numpy 2d-array:

    .. math::
        \begin{equation}
            [[t_0, g_0], ..., [t_f, g_f]]
        \end{equation}

    where :math:`t_0` and :math:`t_f` are points in time (microseconds) and
    :math:`g_0` and :math:`g_f` are points of :math:`g`. The initial
    :math:`g` must be 0.

*   ``bandwidth``: Bandwidth (MHz) of a low-pass filter's cutoff frequency
    used in the Bessel filter. Valid values are the following:

    *   ``Adv``: 3 MHz

    *   ``Adv2``: 30 MHz

    *   Integer: Arbitrary bandwidth

Two ``np.vstack`` structures are returned as follows:

> 
> *   The first ``np.vstack`` is the filtered h-gain waveform.
> 
> *   The second ``np.vstack`` is the original h-gain waveform.
> 
> .. code-block:: py
> 
>     >>> import numpy as np
>     >>> from scipy import signal
>     >>> import warnings
>     >>>
>     >>> def approximate_filtered_h_gain (pwl, bandwidth):
>     >>>     t_i = pwl[0,0]
>     >>>     t_f = pwl[-1,0]
>     >>>     cur_g = pwl[0,1]
>     >>>     if (cur_g != 0.0):
>     >>>         warnings.warn("This function only processes PWL curves starting from 0.0 bias." \
>     >>>         "Add a point to the beginning of your PWL with zero bias.")
>     >>>
>     >>>     if bandwidth == 'Adv':
>     >>>         bandwidth = 3
>     >>>     elif bandwidth == 'Adv2':
>     >>>         bandwidth = 30
>     >>>
>     >>>     sampling_rate = int(bandwidth * 100)
>     >>>     time_array = np.linspace(t_i, t_f, int(np.ceil(sampling_rate * (t_f-t_i))))
>     >>>     sig = np.interp(time_array, pwl[:, 0], pwl[:, 1])
>     >>>     b, a = signal.bessel(2, 2/100, btype="lowpass", analog=False, output="ba", norm="mag")
>     >>>
>     >>>     return np.vstack([time_array, signal.lfilter(b, a, sig)]).T, np.vstack([time_array, sig]).T
> 
> The following example creates plots for both |dwave_5kq| and |adv2| by
> calling the ``approximate_filtered_h_gain`` method and passing ``test_pwl``
> as the original h-gain waveform and ``filters`` as the |dwave_5kq| and
> |adv2| low-pass filters' cutoff frequencies.
> 
> .. code-block:: py
> 
>     >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plot
>     >>>
>     >>> test_pwl = np.array([[0.0, 0.0], [0.1, 0.1], [0.101, 1.0], [0.2, 1.0], [0.202, 0.0], [0.3, 0.0]])
>     >>> fig, ax = plot.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10,10))
>     >>> filters = ['Adv', 'Adv2']
>     >>>
>     >>> for i in range(2):
>     >>>     ax[i].plot(test_pwl[:,0], test_pwl[:,1], "o-", label="Original h-gain waveform")
>     >>>     filtered, sig = approximate_filtered_h_gain(test_pwl, filters[i])
>     >>>     ax[i].plot(sig[:,0], sig[:,1], ".", label="Resampled original signal")
>     >>>     ax[i].plot(filtered[:,0], filtered[:,1], label="Filtered h-gain waveform")
>     >>>     ax[i].set_xlabel("Time ($\mu$s)")
>     >>>     ax[i].set_ylabel("g")
>     >>>     ax[i].grid()
>     >>>     ax[i].legend()
>     >>>     
>     >>>     if filters[i] == 'Adv':
>     >>>         ax[i].set_title(f"Advantage 3 MHz Filter")
>     >>>     elif filters[i] == 'Adv2':
>     >>>         ax[i].set_title(f"Advantage2 30 MHz Filter")
>     >>>
>     >>> plot.show()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. testcode::

    import numpy as np
    from scipy import signal
    import warnings

    def approximate_filtered_h_gain(pwl: np.typing.ArrayLike,
                                    bandwidth: float) -> np.typing.ArrayLike:
        """Approximate the h-gain schedule executed on a QPU.

        Args:
            pwl: Input h-gain schedule, as a 2D array-like, that defines a
                nominal piece-wise linear (PWL) waveform of time and gain values,
                [[0.0, 0.0], ..., [t_f, g_f]]. The first value must be [0.0, 0.0].

            bandwidth: Cutoff frequency, as a floating point number in MHz, of
                the low-pass filter on the  QPU I/O line. Valid values are the
                following:

                *   3: 3 Mhz for an Advantage QPU.
                *   30: 30 Mhz for an Advantage2 QPU.

        Returns:
            Filtered h-gain waveform and the resampled input h-gain waveform.
        """

        pwl = np.asarray(pwl)
        t_i = pwl[0, 0]
        t_f = pwl[-1, 0]
        cur_g = pwl[0, 1]

        assert cur_g == 0.0, "Please add ``[0.0, 0.0]`` as the first ``pwl`` value."

        sampling_rate = int(bandwidth * 100)
        time_array = np.linspace(t_i, t_f, int(np.ceil(sampling_rate * (t_f - t_i))))
        sig = np.interp(time_array, pwl[:, 0], pwl[:, 1])
        b, a = signal.bessel(2, 2/100, btype="lowpass", analog=False, output="ba", norm="mag")

        return np.vstack([time_array, signal.lfilter(b, a, sig)]).T, np.vstack([time_array, sig]).T

```

A few points here:

1. It's nicer to give the code without the prompts (``testcode`` instead of ``code-block``)
2. Description of the function should be in its docstring (plus added typing, which might require a hidden import, see what happens with the doctest)
3. Might as well enable input of both Python and NumPy arrays as the PWL parameter
4. We do not need to provide code for plotting a comparison between two waveforms, users know how to do this themselves
5. Currently much to long, this shortens to just the essentials

See the :ref:`qpu_annealprotocol_fast` section for further details.

.. _qpu_qa_linear_bias_sched:

Varying the Linear-Bias Schedule
================================

For the :ref:`standard annealing <qpu_annealprotocol_standard>` and
:ref:`reverse annealing <qpu_qa_anneal_sched_reverse>` protocols, you can
schedule a time-dependent gain for the Hamiltonian's linear biases (i.e., qubit
biases). The :ref:`parameter_qpu_h_gain_schedule` parameter specifies the
:math:`g(t)` function that is applied to qubit biases :math:`h_i`  in the
Hamiltonian,

.. include:: ../shared/anneal.rst
    :start-after: start_gt_hamiltonion
    :end-before: end_gt_hamiltonion

>  For examples of using this feature, see [Vod2025]_ and [Pel2023]_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples of using this feature, see [Vod2025]_ and [Pel2023]_.
```

Also a problem of a leading space:

```
 ERROR: Error in "include" directive:
no content permitted.

.. include:: ../shared/anneal.rst
    :start-after: start_gt_hamiltonion
    :end-before: end_gt_hamiltonion

 For examples of using this feature, see [Vod2025]_ and [Pel2023]_. [docutils]
```

<img width="195" height="224" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/793e95f5-98b3-4622-9123-9d8e614b3ddb" />

See the :ref:`qpu_annealprotocol_fast` section for further details.

.. _qpu_qa_h_gain:

Varying the Linear-Bias Schedule 
================================

For more control of the annealing process, you can schedule the time-dependent
gain for the Hamiltonian's linear biases (i.e., qubit biases). Time-dependent

> gain for qubit biases can be used with the standard annealing and reverse

Reviewer: "the standard annealing and reverse" --> consider making "standard annealing" and "reverse annealing" hyperlinks to [Standard-Anneal Protocol](https://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/quantum_research/annealing.html#standard-anneal-protocol) and [Reverse Annealing](https://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/quantum_research/annealing.html#reverse-annealing) sections, respectively
